---
title: Tolerance Paralogism
author: Yiğit Küçük
date: 2021-12-10 14:10:00 +0800
categories: [English Essay, Academic]
tags: [Tolerance, Multiculturalism]
render_with_liquid: false
---

## Tolerance Paralogism

Tolerance is sympathy and a positive attitude towards beliefs or actions differing from one’s own. Tolerance is a key concept in liberalism, however to what degree it can be embraced is a query that has been heavily debated by political philosophers, liberal citizens, and governments. Since the start of the millennia, with the increasing accessibility of the internet, people got the chance to communicate with each other more freely and less expensively. With this progression, they started to realize that people from other countries had different rights and opportunities. This realization led people to ask for more rights and chances from the government. Especially members of the illiberal minority groups asked for recognition, respect, and their earned right to live a peaceful life. Demands of illiberal minority groups in liberal societies made liberals question the importance of the tolerance concept. Many liberals agree that toleration is essential for a healthy society, but some of them think that mere tolerance is never enough without recognition and affirmations of differences. There is one more view on tolerance, defending that liberal tolerance will result in illiberal decisions. Liberal states should interfere in certain situations to protect the individual rights of minorities, these states should never tolerate the behavior of illiberal minorities that can harm members of society in distinct ways, and liberal values should be imposed on illiberal minorities to achieve liberty and equality in all layers of the community. Conversely, advocates of liberal tolerance dictate that it is against liberal values to impose liberal norms on illiberal minorities, and interference of the state is not justified.

Liberal states have to interfere in specific situations to protect the individual rights of minority members in society. Liberal states should never ignore the violation of individual rights. Will Kymlicka, a well-known Canadian political philosopher, brings a new point of view to the interference of the state. He suggests that insistence on respect for individual rights can be considered a new view on ethnocentrism, which centers liberal norms in society for everyone else to accept
(153). Although Kymlicka supports interference of the state in certain situations like inhumane behavior from the illiberal groups, he also argues that as long as a group doesn’t pose a threat to society, lets its dissenting members leave the group and there is a consensus among the group members, intervening with them can be considered illiberal (170). While his argument on insistence and ethnocentrism is true, tolerance can also be considered an ethnocentric view. Tolerance is set on the moral values of those who have the power to tolerate or not and on their superiority complex, Helmut Oberdiek acknowledges (in Horton 5). Although Kymlicka’s idea on interference and when it can be justified seems to be valid for all members of illiberal groups, it isn’t. If one is born into an illiberal group, he will be raised according to his parents’ and group members’ views on life, religion, and other phenomena. In this case, this person will probably embrace these views and never question them. Even if he dissents and is allowed to leave the group, he most likely won’t, considering his economic state and the marginalization he will get from his group members and family. Even if he leaves the group regardless, he will be treated assuming he is still a member of that group. Considering these cases, letting minority groups restrict their own members’ rights even if there is consensus and independence to leave the 
group, contradicts liberal values. Chandran Kukathas, a Malaysian-born Australian political theorist points out that in illiberal groups women might be denied the right to seek proper education and people with different sexual orientations can be restricted from some workplaces (42). Looking at these examples, not interfering with these behaviors would be abandoning people’s rights. In conclusion, states should interfere when an individual’s rights are restricted by his/her group members. To achieve this, governments should keep track of social media and news sources to identify oppression and discrimination against these people.

Liberal states should never tolerate groups that are responsible for illiberal behavior that can be harmful to some citizens in society. Looking from both the minority and majority perspectives, toleration is not a great approach to differences. Proponents of multiculturalism assert that toleration is simply an act of generosity from the people who have the potency, and it should never be considered an alternative for approval and recognition that minorities are longing for, as Maykel Vertunyen, a professor of interdisciplinary social science puts it (148). Indeed, toleration patronizes minorities and makes them feel excluded from the public space by doing so. Oberdiek agrees, “No one likes being tolerated, most resent it. To be tolerated is to be an object of contempt, condescension, or patronizing suffocation”
(qtd. in Horton 5). The aggressive and oppressive behavior of illiberal minorities should never be tolerated. For example, if an individual wants to dress according to his/her personal beliefs, it is okay. However if this individual tries to force other people to dress like himself/herself, then this behavior should not be tolerated in any way and should be considered a crime. Kukathas adduces that, a system that tolerates illiberal behavior, which he visualizes as “Federation of Liberty” can end up being “not much of a liberty” in the long run (41). Toleration of these kinds of behavior will backfire and eventually result in more demanding illiberal minorities, asking for rights that are incompatible with liberal norms and laws that are against liberal values. In summary; toleration will not bring peace to society, rather it will bring hatred and discrimination between groups. Letting these illiberal behavior oppress citizens will eventually increase distinctness between groups. To prevent these, new laws should be added to the justice system to protect liberal values and citizens from the restrictive behavior of illiberal groups.

Liberal values should be imposed on illiberal minorities to achieve liberty and equality in every layer of the community. This should not be in a way that brainwashes them into admitting liberal norms, but in a way that makes them understand the core of liberalism and perhaps agree on a middle path between liberal and illiberal views. This middle path is not necessarily accepting aggression and oppression, but a way that fills in the holes of liberal norms, benefiting from the opposing views and making liberal values more complete. Kukathas, while he talks about his visualization on a system called “Union of Liberty” suggests that it might contradict liberal values to educate those who are ignorant of their rights (40). While one might argue that this process can be considered illiberal, in the end, both liberalism and the public space will benefit from this interaction between two opposing views. All in all, while there can be discussions made about whether education based on liberal norms contradict liberal norms or not, after some generations society will benefit from this system, and liberalism will be a more complete view in all aspects. While providing this education, states should be very precise and aware that wrong teachings can harm liberal values in the future drastically.

Advocates of liberal tolerance claim that it is against liberal norms to impose liberal values on illiberal minorities and interference of the state is not justified.
Horton contends, looking from a multiculturalist point of view traditional approach to tolerance is generally not the greatest reply to differences in society (19). As discussed before, minorities do not want tolerance, they want acceptation and recognition. “Their demand for recognition goes far beyond the familiar plea
toleration, for the latter implies conceding the validity of society’s disapproval and relying on its self-restraint. Rather they ask for the acceptance, respect, and even
public affirmation of their differences.” Bhikhu Parekh agrees (qtd. in Horton 4). This sums it up well that minorities are not longing for tolerance at all. Horton asserts that; although the traditional approach to tolerance is a bit outdated, it is still important for its task to make the coexistence of antagonistic groups possible (19). While he is right that tolerance can make the coexistence of these groups possible; forcing these groups to tolerate each other can backfire horribly. It is practically impossible for everyone to agree on the boundaries of toleration, so toleration will likely increase discrimination and differentiation between groups, and possibly between individuals. Horton also agrees, saying that everyone will draw the line between tolerance and intervention somewhere different (19). There is confusion on the limits of toleration.
The reason for this haziness is that limits of toleration are also drawn by moral values set in society. In this case, saying intervention is illiberal while tolerance is liberal would be a discrepancy; because what will be tolerated and what won’t be tolerated is dictated by people who have the potency to tolerate or not, Oberdiek agrees (in Horton 5). So, an argument can be made that imposing liberal values is more liberal. In essence, imposing liberal values and imposing tolerance are indeed not so distinct. In this case, teaching liberal values to children is more of a liberal approach than brainwashing them into tolerating behavior society wants and not tolerating others. To teach liberal values to children, new lectures should be added to the curriculum, and an environment that is open to discussions between different views should be created.

Overall; interference of the state is necessary to protect the rights of citizens, liberal states should never tolerate aggressive and oppressive behavior of illiberal groups, and liberal values should be imposed on illiberal minorities to create a liberal society that embraces equality. Interference can be justified in some other situations not mentioned by Kymlicka, toleration of harmful behavior should never be the case and imposing liberal norms on illiberal minorities is not illiberal. To achieve a liberal and equal society, the school curriculum should be changed in a way that it will be benefitting from opposing views. This way, different liberal views can be modified in a way that is more suitable for humankind’s lifestyle. Also, we should look back in history and identify our mistakes where toleration or intervention did not work. This way, we can be ready for future problems regarding tolerance and interference.


### Works Cited

Horton, John. “Toleration and Multiculturalism.” Dialnet, 2016. dialnet.unirioja.es/descarga/articulo/5770954.pdf Kukathas, Chandran. “Can a Liberal Society Tolerate Illiberal Elements?” Policy, vol. 17, no.2, 2001, pp. 39-44.

Kymlicka, Will. “Toleration and Its Limits.” Multicultural Citizenship: A Liberal Theory of Minority Rights. Oxford University Press, 1996, pp.152-173.

Verkuyten, Maykel. “Multiculturalism and Tolerance: An Intergroup Perspective.” The Psychology of Social and Cultural Diversity., edited by Richard J. Crisp, Wiley Blackwell, 2010, pp. 147–170. EBSCOhost, doi:10.1002/9781444325447.ch7.
