---
title: Multiculturalism - A Way to Achieve Unity Within the Society
author: Yiğit Küçük
date: 2022-11-04 14:10:00 +0800
categories: [English Essay, Academic]
tags: [Multiculturalism]
render_with_liquid: false
---

## Multiculturalism - A Way to Achieve Unity Within the Society

Multiculturalism is the view that racial, cultural, ethnic, sexual, and religious minority groups should be given special recognition to preserve their existence.
Debates on multiculturalism started in the early 80s. These debates were mostly on whether the school curriculum should be changed in a way that recognizes the achievements of the socially marginalized groups. As of the start of the 90s, with the widening human rights and more effective communication technologies; excluded
members of the society had the chance to interact with each other, and eventually, these individuals created groups to express themselves better. As the groups found the courage to challenge the disrespect they have received and wanted equality; governments had to come up with policies to provide this. Not only that but also the increasing number of migrants in first-world countries made taking action and new multicultural policies almost a necessity. This is why multiculturalism as a concept is still worth discussing even after four decades. Multicultural policies gather communities together by achieving equality, encouraging interactions between
different groups, and integrating minorities into the society without assimilating them. However, advocates of anti-multiculturalism argue that multiculturalism causes separation, segmentation, and fragmentation and it is the cause of the hatred and marginalization towards the minorities within the dominant political culture.
 
Multiculturalist policies bring communities together by achieving equality in society. Multiculturalist view on equality is that it is a necessity to maintain peace within the society. Minorities do not want to be alienated or excluded. Modood, a British-Pakistani Professor of Sociology, contends that minorities don’t want to be tolerated, they want to be accepted and be a part of the public space (65).
Marginalizing minorities have bad consequences. If members of a certain minority group feel estranged or alienated and feel excluded from the public space; they will lose their enthusiasm to contribute to society. This will eventually result in the loss of many worthy members of society. There can be many minority groups in a society seeking equality like gay people, religious people, or people of color. To give these minority groups equal respect and equal rights; multiculturalist policies’ solution is
recognizing discriminations and destroying them with laws. Canada is one of the countries that managed to prepare special laws that prohibit discrimination based on gender, ethnicity, race. With these laws, Canada created a healthy community where every individual has respect for each other. All in all, equality is one of the keys to
maintaining a healthy and functioning community, and multiculturalist policies are the best way to provide it.

Multiculturalism unites communities by encouraging different groups to interact. As the leading Canadian writer Will Kymlicka puts it: “Multiculturalism in
Canada encourages the members of different immigrant groups to interact, to share their cultural heritage, and to participate in common educational, economic, political, and legal institutions” (qtd. in Giddens). Interactions between different groups help to decrease the distinction between them. With interactions, groups get to understand each other better and realize the discriminations other groups may be facing. Eventually, these groups will start to develop mutual sympathy; which will destroy discrimination between them. Modood defends that the interactive idea of integration will make the members of society rethink what it means to belong to the society (67). This reflexive rethinking will eventually make minority groups feel more accepted in the public space, as in the example of Canada. All things considered; encouraging interactions between different groups is an effective way to bring communities together and without multicultural policies; it is very unlikely to happen.

Multiculturalism connects communities by providing an environment in which the minorities can be integrated without being assimilated. Assimilation is a one-way process that members of the minority groups are forced to be like the existing stereotypes in the dominant political environment. These stereotypes can be cultural, religious, or gender-based. The multiculturalist view on integration is different.
“Multiculturalist concept of integration is not one way but interactive” Modood emphasizes (67). Assimilationist policies assert a common identity, like in France
(Malik, 31). Conversely, multiculturalism encourages diversity of identities in society. Minority groups in societies tend to resist the assimilation process to preserve their existence and culture. They do not feel comfortable in a dominant culture which presumably has very little to do with their own culture. To integrate them,
multicultural policies suggest a hybrid culture composed of both the minority and majority cultures. In a hybrid cultural environment, members of both the minority and majority groups will redefine their identities. As these groups get closer to each other with encouraged interactions; their definition of their own identities will also get closer. Modood asserts that “Shaped through intellectual, cultural and political debates, such identities are fluid and susceptible to change with the political climate” (69). Eventually, these fluid identities will gather under one roof. For example; an Asian, an African American, a Californian, and an Alabaman will all identify as “American”. In summary; multicultural policies provide an open environment that makes the integration of minorities into the dominant culture much easier. As they get integrated, walls between different groups will collapse and communities will gather.

Advocates of anti-multiculturalism assert that multiculturalism causes separation, segmentation, fragmentation and it is the cause of hatred and
marginalization against minority groups in society. Kenan Malik, a British-Indian Professor of Sociology claims that multiculturalism has become a proxy for social and political problems, and no matter where and how it is implemented; the consequences have always been segmented societies and marginalized minorities. He also mentions that multicultural policies categorize people and constrain the diversity within the society (21). He has a point that multiculturalism has become a proxy and a tool for some other issues, however, this is only because of the growing concerns of some politicians and their so-called “political correctness”. On the other hand, his “it never works” argument is not true, as there have been cases where multiculturalism united communities rather than separating them, like Canada. His argument on categorization is also wrong. Multicultural policies indeed generalize some groups to recognize discrimination against them better. The multiculturalist concept is aware of the fact that not all members of a society are the same. It is also aware of the fact that regardless of the social level of a minority member, discriminations happen. In this perspective; it is not entirely a categorization, it is an assumption that they may face discrimination.
 
In conclusion, multiculturalism is the way to gather communities together with its very own key concepts like equality, integration, and encouraged interactions.
These policies may have not been implemented correctly yet, however, with the appropriate training of citizens, there is no reason it cannot be implemented. We can follow Canada on this road and get a better idea of how to implement multiculturalism. Also, it is a good way to look at our mistakes and get some lessons out of them.


### Works Cited

Giddens, Anthony. “Misunderstanding Multiculturalism.” The Guardian, 14 Oct. 2006. https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2006/oct/14/tonygiddens. Accessed 27 Aug. 2020.

Malik, Kenan. “The Failure of Multiculturalism: Community Versus Society in Europe.” Foreign Affairs, March/April 2015, vol. 94, no. 2, pp. 21-26, 27-32. JSTOR, http://www.jstor.com/stable/24483478

Modood, Tariq. “A Defence of Multiculturalism.” Soundings, 2005, pp. 62-71. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/262865374_A_Defence_of_Multiculturalism/citation/download. Accessed 1 Sept. 2020.
